add docs and blog post how to switch from `master` to `main` (#3352)
nf-core/website: sites/docs/src/content/docs/tutorials/switching_branch_to_main/switching_master_to_main.md

---
title: "Best Practices for renaming 'master' to 'main' in pipelines"
subtitle: How to switch your pipelines default branch from 'master' to 'main'
weight: 20
---

This guide shows you how to change your pipeline default branch from `master` to `main`.

## Prequisites

- Admin privileges for the GitHub repository where the change is taking place
- nf-core tools

:::warning
Ensure that your version of `nf-core/tools` matches the pipeline's template version by checking the `.nf-core.yml` file. This prevents introducing unrelated changes and keeps the update limited to switching the default branch from `master` to `main`.
:::

## Instructions

1. Open your repository on GitHub. Make sure you're viewing the `master` branch.

> 2. Select Branches. It's located to the right of the branch dropdown that shows `master`.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Select **Branches**. It's located to the right of the branch dropdown that shows `master`.
```

<img width=80% alt="Branches button" src="/images/tutorials/switching_master_to_main/branches_button.png">

3. In the **Default** branch section, find the `master` branch and select the **More options** (three-dot) menu, then select **Rename branch**.

:::note
You will need permissions to change this setting. If you don't have permission, ask the @core-team for help on Slack.
:::

<img width=80% alt="Rename branch button" src="/images/tutorials/switching_master_to_main/rename_branch_button.png">

4.  Rename `master` to `main`.
5.  Select the **learn more**, then copy the displayed instructions and save them somewhere safe.

:::note
These instructions will be useful for all pipeline contributors, so keep this to one side until the end of this tutorial!
:::

<img width=80% alt="Learn more button" src="/images/tutorials/switching_master_to_main/learn_more_button.png">

6. Select **Rename branch**.

> 7. Select the **Code** tab and verify you are now on `main`
> 8. In your local IDE (e.g., VS Code), ensure you are on the `dev` branch
> 9. Run `git fetch upstream` to ensure you have the `main` branch locally

Author: ```suggestion
7. Select the **Code** tab and verify you are now on `main`.
8. In your local IDE (e.g., VS Code), ensure you are on the `dev` branch.
9. Run `git fetch upstream` to ensure you have the `main` branch locally.
```

10. Run `git config --global init.defaultBranch main` to change your `git` config to `main`.
11. Run `git config --global init.defaultBranch` to check your `git` config again, it should now report `main`.

> 12. While still on `dev`, run `nf-core pipelines sync`

Author: ```suggestion
12. While still on `dev`, run `nf-core pipelines sync`.
```

13. Run `git switch -c default-branch-change` to switch to a new branch.

> 14. Follow the TEMPLATE merge instructions, i.e., `git merge TEMPLATE`.

Author: ```suggestion
14. Run `git merge TEMPLATE`.
```

:::note
If you don't want any other template changes, make sure to use the `nf-core/tools` version that matches the template version in your pipeline.
:::

> 15. Resolve merge conflicts

Author: ```suggestion
15. Resolve merge conflicts.
```

:::tip
If it's the ROcrate JSON file, you can accept all incoming change.
:::

16. Run a global repository search in your IDE to check that references of your pipelines `master` are now `main`.

:::warning
Make sure not to modify references of master in links to other repositories!
If in doubt, ask on the nf-core Slack!
:::

17. Run `nf-core pipelines lint` to check you didn't break anything.
18. Run `git add -am 'Change default branch'` to commit and merge.
19. Run `git push` to push changes.

> 20. On GitHub, make a new PR against `dev`
> 21. Review the PR to check all relevant links and the `nextflow.config` manifest say `main`

Author: ```suggestion
20. On GitHub, make a new PR against `dev`.
21. Review the PR to check all relevant links and the `nextflow.config` manifest say `main`.
```

---
title: "Transitioning from `master` to `main` branches in pipelines"
subtitle: Guide on how to switch a pipeline from the default branch `master` to `main`
weight: 20
---

This tutorial will guide you through changing the pipeline default branch form `master` to `main`.

## Prequisites

- Admin rights on the GitHub repository where the change is taking place
- nf-core tools

:::warning
Make sure you are on using the same version of nf-core/tools as the template version of your branch (you can see the version in `.nf-core.yml`).
This will avoid adding other changes not needed for the branch name switch.
:::

## Instructions

> 1. Open your repository on GitHub (make sure you're on `master`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open your repository on GitHub. Make sure you're viewing the master branch.
```

Author: ```suggestion
1. Open your repository on GitHub. Make sure you're viewing the `master` branch.
```

> 2. Go to the `branches` page (to the right of the `branches` drop down where it says 'master')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select Branches. It's located to the right of the branch dropdown that shows `master`.
```

<img width=80% alt="Branches button" src="/images/tutorials/switching_master_to_main/branches_button.png">

> 3. Under the default branch section of the page, press the triple dot menu on the `master` branch row, and press 'Rename branch'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the **Default** branch section, find the `master` branch and select the **More options** (three-dot) menu, then select **Rename branch**.
```

:::note

> You will need permissions to change this setting. If you don't have permission, ask the @core-team to do it for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will need permissions to change this setting. If you don't have permission, ask the @core-team for help.
```

Author: ```suggestion
You will need permissions to change this setting. If you don't have permission, ask the @core-team for help on Slack.
```

:::

<img width=80% alt="Rename branch button" src="/images/tutorials/switching_master_to_main/rename_branch_button.png">

> 4.  Rename `master` to `main`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4.  Rename `master` to `main`.
```

> 5.  Press the 'learn more' text, and copy and paste the displayed instructions somewhere safe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5.  Select the **learn more**, then copy the displayed instructions and save them somewhere safe.
```

:::note
These instructions will be usefur for all pipeline contributors.
:::

<img width=80% alt="Learn more button" src="/images/tutorials/switching_master_to_main/learn_more_button.png">

> 6. Press 'Rename branch'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Select **Rename branch**.
```

> 7. Go back to 'Code' tab to verify you are now on `main`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Select the **Code** tab and verify you are now on `main`
```

> 8. In your local IDE (e.g. VSCode) make sure you're on the `dev` branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. In your local IDE (e.g., VS Code), ensure you are on the `dev` branch
```

9. Run `git fetch upstream` to ensure you have the `main` branch locally

> 10. Change your `git` config to `main` with:
> 
>     ```bash
>     git config --global init.defaultBranch main
>     ```
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10. Run `git config --global init.defaultBranch main` to change your `git` config to `main`.
```

> 11. Check your `git` config again to check it change (it should now report `main`):
> 
>     ```bash
>     git config --global init.defaultBranch
>     ```
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
11. Run `git config --global init.defaultBranch` to check your `git` config again,  it should now report `main`.
```

12. Still on `dev`, run `nf-core pipelines sync`

> 13. Change to a new branch `git switch -c default-branch-change`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
13. Run `git switch -c default-branch-change` to switch to a new branch.
```

> 14. Follow the TEMPLATE merge instructions, i.e. `git merge TEMPLATE`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
14. Follow the TEMPLATE merge instructions, i.e., `git merge TEMPLATE`.
```

:::note
If you don't want any other template changes, make sure to use `nf-core/tools` version that matches the template version in your pipeline
:::

15. Resolve merge conflicts

:::tip
If it's the ROcrate file, you can accept all incoming chagnes
:::

> 16. Check that all references of your pipelines' `msater` is now `main` using a global repository search in your IDE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
16. Run a global repository search in your IDE to check that references of your pipelines `master` are now `main`.
```

:::warning
Make sure not to modify references of master in links to other repositories!
If in doubt, ask on the nf-core slack!
:::

> 17. Run `nf-core pipelines lint` to check you didn't break anything

Reviewer: ```suggestion
17. Run `nf-core pipelines lint` to check you didn't break anything.
```

18. Commit and merge `git add -am 'Change default branch'

> 19. Push the changes `git push`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
19. Run `git push` to push changes.
```

> 20. On GitHub make a new PR against `dev`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
20. On GitHub, make a new PR against `dev`
```

---

> title: "Transitioning from `master` to `main` branches in pipelines"

Reviewer 2: **nitpick:** Headers don't like markdown backticks: 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a49c92df-ed3d-4d78-b147-20f433be7243)

> subtitle: Guide on how to switch a pipeline from the default branch `master` to `main`

Author: ```suggestion
subtitle: How to switch your pipelines default branch from 'master' to 'main'
```

weight: 20
---

> This tutorial will guide you through changing the pipeline default branch form `master` to `main`.

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
This tutorial will guide you through changing the pipeline default branch from `master` to `main`.
```

## Prequisites

- Admin rights on the GitHub repository where the change is taking place
- nf-core tools

>   - It is recommended that the version match the version of the template in your pipeline

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
```

AS it's in the warning box below

:::warning
Make sure you are on using the same version of nf-core/tools as the template version of your branch (you can see the version in `.nf-core.yml`).
This will avoid adding other changes not needed for the branch name switch.
:::

## Instructions

1. Open your repository on GitHub (make sure you're on `master`)
2. Go to the `branches` page (to the right of the `branches` drop down where it says 'master')

> <img width=80% alt="Branches button" src="/images/tutorials/switching_master_to_main/branches_button.png">

Reviewer 2: **todo:** Image isn't displayed

Author: I can see the images in the tutorial. The ones that I can't see are the header in the blog post and the video, not sure if I did something wrong or there is something wrong with the preview? 🤔 
<img width="766" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a6628419-88d8-4f23-9c4d-ccd604b9692e" />

3. Under the default branch section of the page, press the triple dot menu on the `master` branch row, and press 'Rename branch'

:::note

> You will need permissions to change this setting. If you don't have permission, ask the @core-team to do it for you.

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
You will need permissions to change this setting. If you don't have permission, ask the @core-team on Slack to do it for you.
```

:::

<img width=80% alt="Rename branch button" src="/images/tutorials/switching_master_to_main/rename_branch_button.png">

4.  Rename `master` to `main`
5.  Press the 'learn more' text, and copy and paste the displayed instructions somewhere safe.

:::note

> These instructions will be usefur for all pipeline contributors.

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
These instructions will be useful for all pipeline contributors, so keep this to one side until the end of this tutorial!
```

:::

<img width=80% alt="Learn more button" src="/images/tutorials/switching_master_to_main/learn_more_button.png">

6. Press 'Rename branch'
7. Go back to 'Code' tab to verify you are now on `main`
8. In your local IDE (e.g. VSCode) make sure you're on the `dev` branch
9. Run `git fetch upstream` to ensure you have the `main` branch locally
10. Change your `git` config to `main` with:

    ```bash
    git config --global init.defaultBranch main
    ```

11. Check your `git` config again to check it change (it should now report `main`):

    ```bash
    git config --global init.defaultBranch
    ```

> 12. Still on `dev`, run `nf-core pipelines sync`

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
12. While still on `dev`, run `nf-core pipelines sync`
```

13. Change to a new branch `git switch -c default-branch-change`

> 14. Follow the merge TEMPLATE instructions, i.e. `git merge TEMPLATE`

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
14. Follow the TEMPLATE merge instructions, i.e. `git merge TEMPLATE`
```

:::note

> If you don't want any other template changes, make sure to use `nf-core/tools` version that matches the template version in your pipeline

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
If you don't want any other template changes, make sure to use the `nf-core/tools` version that matches the template version in your pipeline
```

:::

15. Resolve merge conflicts

:::tip

> If it's the ROcrate file, you can accept all incoming chagnes

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
If it's the ROcrate JSON file, you can accept all incoming change
```

:::

> 16. Check that all references of your pipelines' `msater` is now `main` using a global repository search in your IDE

Reviewer 2: **praise:** 
```suggestion
16. Check that all references of your pipelines' `master` is now `main` using a global repository search in your IDE
```

:::warning
Make sure not to modify references of master in links to other repositories!

> If in doubt, ask on the nf-core slack!

Reviewer 2: **praise:** 
```suggestion
If in doubt, ask on the nf-core Slack!
```

:::

17. Run `nf-core pipelines lint` to check you didn't break anything

> 18. Commit and merge `git add -am 'Change default branch'

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
18. Commit and merge `git add -am 'Change default branch'`
```

19. Push the changes `git push`
20. On GitHub make a new PR against `dev`

> 21. Review PR to check all links and `nextflow.config` manifest say `main`

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
21. Review PR to check all relevant links and the `nextflow.config` manifest say `main`
```

> 22. Review and merge :tada:

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
22. Request a community review on #request-review on Slack, and once you have an approval...
23. ... merge! :tada:
```

## Post-change instructions

> 1. Inform all your collaborators (on slack, etc.) that the default branch has changed, and that they should update their clones and forks, i.e.:

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
1. Inform all your collaborators (on Slack, etc.) that the default branch has changed, and that they should update their clones and forks, i.e.:
```

   ```bash
   git branch -m master main
   git fetch origin
   git branch -u origin/main main
   git remote set-head origin -a
   ```

> 2. Update your own clones and forks

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** 
```suggestion
2. Update your own clones and forks (with the commands above)
```
